pfswib a potential chromatin regulator for var gene regulation and parasite development in plasmodium falciparum.background various transcription factors are involved in the process of mutually exclusive expression and clonal variation of the plasmodium multigene var family. recent studies revealed that a p. falciparum swisnfrelated matrixassociated actindependent regulator of chromatin pfswib might trigger stagespecific programmed cell death pcd and was not only crucial for the survival and development of parasite but also had profound effects on the parasite by interacting with other unknown proteins. however it remains unclear whether pfsiwb is involved in transcriptional regulation of this virulence gene and its functional properties.methods a conditional knockdown system pfswibfkbplid was introduced to the parasite clone d and an integrated parasite line pfswibhafkbplid was obtained by drug cycling and clone screening. growth curve analysis gca was performed to investigate the growth and development of different parasite lines during h in vitro culturing by assessing parasitemia. finally we performed qpcr assays to detect var gene expression profiling in various comparison groups as well as the mutually exclusive expression pattern of the var genes within a single h lifecycle of p. falciparum in different parasite lines. in addition rnaseq was applied to analyze the var gene expression in different lines.results gca revealed that conditional knockdown of pfswib could interfere with the growth and development of p. falciparum. the parasitemia of pfswib showed a significant decline at h during in vitro culture compared with the pfswib and d lines p . qpcr and rnaseq analysis confirmed that depletion of pfswib not only silences upsa upsc and partial upsb var genes as well as removes the silencing of partial upsb var genes at the ring stage in pfswib line but also leads to aberrant expression of upsa and partial upsbupsc var genes at the mature stage of p. falciparum during a single h lifecycle.we demonstrated that pfswib was involved in the process of clonal variation in var gene expression and crucial for the survival and development of plasmodium parasite. these findings could provide better understanding of the mechanism and function of pfswib contributing to the pathogenesis in malaria parasites..plasmodium falciparum which causes malignant malaria such as cerebral malaria cm or pregnancyassociated malaria pam is the cause of death to individuals annually . plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein pfemp which is encoded by the var gene family comprising approximately members is the major virulence factor involved in the antigenic variation and clinical pathogenicity of falciparum malaria . it is remarkable that the expression of var family members is mutually exclusive. for each parasite at a time only one or a few var genes are expressed while the remaining members are silenced . in each generation p. falciparum is able to express different var genes and the switches in var gene expression lead to antigenic variation of pfemp which results in immune evasion and chronic infection . this process has proven to be mediated by epigenetic mechanisms including chromatin modification nuclear architecture and gene relocation .it has been shown that the single active var gene is enriched in euchromatic modifications such as histone lysine acetylation hkac and histone lysine trimethylation hkme particularly near the transcriptional start site tss while the silent var genes are usually enriched in the heterochromatin marker histone lysine trimethylation hkme in the utr or the coding sequence . in this process histone modifying enzymes such as pfmyst pfgcn pfsir and pfset have been considered important for epigenetic control of reversible histone modifications according to previous studies . pfmyst a putative histone acetyltransferases hats in p. falciparum is capable of acetylating multiple lysines on h while an orthologue of the yeast hat pfgcn influences acetylation of hk and k both are essential marks of gene activation . two paralogues of the class iii hdac histone deacetylases sir play key roles in maintaining heterochromatin and mutually exclusive var gene expression . pfsira deacetylates hkac hkac and hkac and is more important in silencing subtelomeric var genes such as upsa upseand upscsubtype vars. in contrast pfsirb silences upsb vars . furthermore a total of ten p. falciparum histone lysine methyltransferases hkmts belonging to the set domain family have been found in p. falciparum . pfset localizes to a specialized region at the nuclear periphery with the active vars such as hkme transferase .plasmodium falciparum variantsilencing set gene pfsetvs controls the hkme on var genes silencing var genes . moreover subnuclear architecture contributes to the regulation of var gene expression .var genes are by default silent since they are located at the nuclear periphery . however active var promoters seem to occupy a privileged expression site of this region making it permissive to transcribe . pf an apiap member binds a conserved motif in var introns mediates episomal anchoring towards the nuclear periphery and recruiting an actin protein complex and polymerized nuclear actin derepresses silent var genes .on the other hand various trans factors are intimately involved in regulating chromatin structure and gene activity. pfalbas contribute to heterochromatin structure and regulation of var gene expression . pfsip another apiap member is involved in the recruitment and organization of subtelomeric heterochromatin through binding to spe and induces a comprehensive silencing of a var promoter. particularly four major classes of atpdependent chromatin remodelers had been found in p. falciparum facilitating the spatial and temporal remodeling of chromatin . all these remodeler families consist of a swisnffamily atpase subunit featuring an atpase domain which includes an hsa helicasesant a posthsa and a cterminal bromodomain. some other conserved subunits carry extra conserved domains such as hbaf sant swirm hbaf swib and human polybromo multiple bromodomains. bafb is generally known as swib or swib an alternative form of the swisnf complex complex b while human bafa protein of swisnf complex is responsible for facilitating cell cycle halting and has the ability to tune the balance between repair and apoptosis induction . recently a swi snfrelated matrixassociated actindependent regulator of chromatin pfswib genbank pfd which is characterized by its swibmdm domain swi complex bafb domain has been identified in p. falciparum. pfswib might trigger stagespecific pcd by which transient nuclear localization causes removal of these parasites . further studies revealed that pfswib was not only crucial for the survival and growth of the parasite but also had profound effects on the parasite by interacting with other unknown proteins . however it remains unclear whether pfswib is involved in transcriptional regulation of virulence gene especially vars and its functional properties.to address the molecular mechanism of pfswib we propose a new conditional knockdown system to study the function and mechanism of chromatin remodeler pfswib in regulating var gene expression. we found that the dysfunction of pfswib might lead to a significant downregulation of upsa upsc and partial upsb var genes at the ring stage in a pfswibknockdown line as well as the aberrant expression of certain var genes at the mature stage in a single h lifecycle of p. falciparum which was characterized by the reversion of transcriptional downregulation of upsa and partial upsb upsc var genes suggesting that pfswib might play a key role on var gene regulating. in addition pfswib knockdown could affect the growth and development of parasite. this study provides a better understanding of the regulatory function of chromatin remodeling complexes crcs in regulating the clonal variation of var genes and an essential insight into the regulation of the major virulence gene family contributing to the pathogenesis in malaria parasites.plasmodium falciparum lines d pfswib and pfswib were first thawed and established for continuous cultivation in vitro according to standard procedures . the cultivation was as follows thawed isolates were cultured in rpmi medium invitrogenthermo fisher scientific carlsbad ca usa containing mm hepes mm lglutamine mm hypoxanthine sigmaaldrich shanghai china mgml gentamicin sigmaaldrich shanghai china albumax ii invitrogenthermo fisher scientific and human serum type ab changhai hospital the second military medical university shanghai china. cultures were grown in media with type o erythrocytes at a hematocrit under o co n at c. to obtain tightly synchronized ring stage parasites a standard percollsorbitol synchronization method was performed . in brief schizonts were isolated over a and percoll cushion and allowed to invade fresh rbcs for to h. the resulting rings were subjected to sorbitol treatment for min at c. this process was repeated twice. the culture was washed and resuspended in complete medium containing rbc after the final sorbitol treatment.all transfected parasite lines originated from the d clone. dna extraction was performed using the qiaamp dna mini kit qiagen hilden germany. the high fidelity kodplusneo enzyme toyobo osaka japan was used for pcr amplification to detect the endogenous pfswib locus or integration of the pfswib locus pfswibhafkbplid. pcr amplification reaction conditions are as follows c for min followed by cycles of c for s c for s c for min and a final extension cycle of c for min. the specific primers used for pcr are listed in additional file table s .plnenrgfp genbank dq was modified by deleting the whole pfenrgfp cassette which was then used to clone various dna fragments in apaibamhi multicloning site. for the plnhafkbplid construct bp the calmodulin promoter cam fragment was initially substituted by a kb c terminus of pfswib in the apaiasci multicloning site. three duplicates of ha tag ypydvpdya and fkbplid tag were ligated towards the c terminus of pfswib via a linker sequence aaaavdaaaa. the resulting vector plnpfswibhafkbplid was used to transfect the d clone. the ha tag consists of three tandem repeat sequences of influenza hemagglutinin whereas the fkbplid tag is comprised of the fkand rapamycinbinding protein and a aminoacid degron fused towards the c terminus of fkbp fig. a .transfections were performed on synchronized ringstage parasites of d in a mm biorad gene pulser cuvettes biorad laboratories hercules ca usa. a minimum of g recombinated plasmid dna was initially purified and used for electroporation using the biorad genepulse xcell electroporator biorad laboratories hercules ca usa at v with a resistance of f and a transfection time of less than ms. positive bsd drug selection at the final concentration of nm was subsequently applied and maintained after the first growth cycle. those parasites that adopted the plnpfswibhafkbplid construct carrying the bsd gene would offer a level of resistance to the drug. the transfected parasites were subjected to in vitro culturing for to days and subsequent bsd drug cycling to select stable singlecrossover parasites. the initial obtained transfected parasite line was a mixture of the episomal and integrated form. therefore a mode of drug screening process was subsequently introduced to enrich the integrated lines. in this process the original transfected parasites were first cultured in vitro in the absence of bsd for weeks followed by weeks of culture with bsd gml therefore integrated lines of pfswibhafkbplid could possibly be further sorted after rounds of drug cycling fig. b . after two cycles of bsd off weeks and bsd on weeks pcr was applied to detect the integration events of pfswibhafkbplid in transfected parasites lines by using specific primers additional file table s . primers p p and p are specific to utr of endogenous pfswib the upstream sequence of pfswib cterminus and downstream plasmid sequence of hafkbplid fusion expression system respectively while fn is the forward primer used for pcr amplification of pfswib cterminus.in order to obtain purified integrated parasites clones we utilized a clone screening assay by serial dilution of parasites in well plates as detailed previously . two stable transfections of pfswibfkbplid integrated parasites clones pfswibc and pfswibb were obtained. the integration events were detected on screened clones after extended the culture to well plates. the primers used for testing the clones are described above see also additional file table s . pcr amplification reaction conditions were as follows c for min followed by cycles of c for s c for s c for min and a final extension cycle of c for min.to analyze the expression of the pfswib fusion system in integrated parasites lines total parasite extracts were prepared by treatment with saponin and resuspended in sdsloading buffer biorad then separated on a sdspage gel biorad and subjected to western blot analysis. total proteins from the d clone were used as controls. an antibody to aldolase dilution roche indianapolis usa was used as a positive control. rabbit antiha dilution abcam cambridge uk was used to identify pfswib fusion proteins in different parasite lines. an enhanced chemiluminescence ecl western blotting kit ge healthcare uppsala sweden was used to develop western blots. the theoretical molecular weight of endogenous pfswib ha tag and hafkbplid tag is kd kd and kd respectively. the graylevel image analysis procedure was implemented with imagej software. statistical significance was determined p p .synchronized ring parasites h after reinvasion of the pfswib integrated clone pfswibhafkbplid and the d clone were collected and diluted to parasitemia. each diluted parasite clone was divided into two wells of parasite cultures in the well plate l rbc pellets ml medium. shield mm diluted in ethanol clontech mountain view usa was added into one of the two wells final concentration m. consequently four parasite lines including pfswib pfswib d shield induced and d sh shield not induced were subject to in vitro culture for days. the parasitemia of each parasite line was counted every h up to h and repeated twice. the rate of parasitemia of different lines were compared statistically by a oneway anova followed by bonferronis multiple comparison test p p . growth curve analysis was performed in triplicate.for the transcription level assay of individual var genes we used the var primer pairs published elsewhere and listed in additional file table s . qpcr assays were performed as described previously . in brief total rna of synchronous parasite culture was extracted using trizol reagent invitrogenthermo fisher scientific carlsbad ca usa . cdna was prepared in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations thermofisher scientific carlsbad ca usa. the fold change between the experimental and reference groups was calculated as cq . qpcr was performed on a quantstudio flex realtime pcr system applied biosystems singapore using a program of cycle of s at c and cycles of s at c s at c s at c. seryltrna synthetase was applied as an endogenous control gene and to normalize the transcriptional level of each var gene. for the qpcr data statistical significance was determined with the twotailed students ttest p p .rnaseq was used to screen differentially expressed genes in three parasite lines and was carried out in duplicate. the reference genome and transcript information p. falciparum d were obtained from plasmodb httpplasm odb.org. the rnaseq aligner star va was used to create a genome catalog based on two data files including a genome sequence fasta file and gff annotation file plasmodbpfalciparumdgenome.fasta plasmodbpfalciparumd. gff . fastqc v was subsequently used to analyze the quality of the rnaseq reads. the qualified reads were subsequently mapped and aligned to the reference genome. reads with a minimum mapping quality of q were further screened out by using sam tools. heatmaps of gene expression profiles in different lines were created by using the r package edger . hierarchical clustering was performed by using one minus pearsons correlation metric and average linkage method. line plots were generated with ggplot . in order to carry out an analysis of variance anovalike differential gene expression analysis a statistical analysis of summarized read counts per genomic feature obtained from feature counts function was performed by using the r package aldex . a fold change greater than or lower than fdr and p were selected as filters for defining the sets of differentially expressed genes. which harbored an antibiotic selection marker bsd for blasticidin s resistance pink. ha tags red and fkbplid tag blue and green were ligated towards the kb c terminus of pfswib. b drug screening of the pfswib fusion expression system. the integration events and expression of pfswib modified locus were identified by pcr. bsd and bsd indicate that the transfected parasites were cultured in the presence or absence of bsd. day in vitro culturing in the absence of bsd for days. day and in vitro culturing in the presence of bsd for and days respectively. the details of specific primers used for detecting the endogenous episomal and integrated pfswib locus are provided in methodsdue to the low transfection proficiency after inserting the fulllength pfswib gene we subsequently selected a kb c terminal sequence of pfswib and cloned this into the modified recombinant plasmids plnenrgfp forming fusion gene expression system plnpfswib cterminushafkbplid. through homologous recombination caused by a single crossover event a transfected parasite clone known as pfswibhafkbplid was obtained by transfecting the recombinant plasmid plnpfswib cterminushafkbplid into the d strain which was selected by blasticidin s deaminase bsd. the ha tag contains three tandem repeat sequences of influenza hemagglutinin whereas fkbplid tag is comprised of the fkand rapamycinbinding protein and a aminoacid degron ligandinduced degradation domain fused to the c terminus of fkbp fig. a . a drug cycling process was subsequently introduced to enrich the integrated lines. the integration events and expression of pfswibhafkbplid fusion gene were first identified by pcr fig. b . the specific primers designed for detecting the transfection proficiency of the pfswib modified locus are listed in additional file table s . additional file figure s shows the screening of integrated clones which were performed by serial dilution and identification of integration events by pcr. stable transfections of pfswibfkbplid integrated parasites clones pfswibc and pfswibb were finally obtained from the cloning and screening process in well plates. since the pfswibc clone exhibited stability and reproducibility in the subsequent assays such as pcr detection and qpcr analysis we selected clone pfswibc rather than clone pfswibb for the present study.western blotting was subsequently performed to detect the expression of pfswibhafkbplid fusion protein in the presence and absence of shield m. according to the previous study pfswib is theoretically stable in the absence of the small molecule shield . alternatively shield binds tightly to fkbp thereby substituting the degron and triggering rapid continuous degradation of the lid domain and pfswib . as shield may take time to exert its inhibition function we selected the in vitro culturing ring and trophozoite parasite stage within their third lifecycle h as testing samples according to the gca results fig. a . the results indicated that although the pfswibhafkbplid kda fusion gene could be successfully expressed in both stages in the presence or absence of shield fig. b additional file figure sa there was still a significant difference of pfswib fusion protein expression between pfswib and pfswib lines in the trophozoite stage the expression of pfswib fusion protein decreased in pfswib line t p . in contrast no significant difference had been found in the ring stage parasite t p fig. b additional file figure sb .to study the specific functions of pfswib we subsequently analyzed the growth curve by counting parasitemia of different groups within h fig. additional file table s . both pfswibc and d parasite clones were initially synchronized into h ring stage parasites and equally divided into two groups. one group contained shield in the culture medium whereas the other group was lacking shield. thus four groups of lines including pfswib pfswib shield induced pfswib pfswib sh shield not induced d sh and d sh were subject into the in vitro culture with exactly the same preliminary parasitemia of .the results of gca revealed no significant difference in parasitemia between these lines during the first h lifecycle f based on the gca result we subsequently performed rnaseq analysis in duplicate with synchronized h ring stage parasites of three p. falciparum lines within their third lifecycle to study the change of expression profiling when knocking down pfswib. the scatter plot illustrates the comparison of screening of differentially expressed genes in three parasite lines including d pfswib and pfswib additional file figure sa . among all differentially expressed genes and were upregulated in the pfswib line when compared with the pfswib and d line respectively whereas and genes were downregulated fold change fc p fdr . we further performed hierarchical clustering of the individual gene expression profiles by using the r package edger. rnaseq data were normalized for sequencing depth and gene length using log transformed fpkm values additional file figure sb . according to the special characteristics of differentially expressed proteins in each line we further screened out transcription factors such as pfapiap family and pfsirb as well as certain histone modification enzymes which proved to be involved in regulating on var gene transcription. these genes were significantly upregulated in the pfswib line suggesting the existence of their different transcription profiling when knocking down pfswib. in addition a number of vars also exhibited differential expression among different lines additional file table s .to further study the transcription patterns of upsa upsband upscsubtype var genes in different parasite lines we first selected differentially expressed vars among different lines based on the rnaseq results fold change fc p fdr and tested the expression patterns of these preferred vars in each comparison group at the ring stage h after reinvasion in rd lifecycle h by realtime pcr additional file table s . upsb or upsa corresponds to subtelomeric and upsc corresponds to chromosome internal var gene members . figure shows the fold change of var gene expression profiling between shield preand postinduced lines pfswib vs pfswib. most upsaand upsctype vars were significantly downregulated in the pfswib line especially the upsa vars when compared to the pfswib line fig. additional file figure s . however the expression pattern of partial upsb vars presented a distinct change in the pfswib line. a group of upsb vars exhibited a high level of expression fig. red asterisk fold change p while upsb vars present an extremely low expression level fig. black asterisk fold change p when compared the pfswib line to other lines.we subsequently reanalyzed the rnaseq results of vars in these lines by using the r package edger to identify similarities and differences in expression patterns for different var variants. the heatmap representing the hierarchical clustering of the var genes is shown in fig. and additional file figure s . figure indicates two major clusters of selected vars in relation to the expression pattern one major cluster consisting of var variants covered most of upsa upsb and all upsc vars while the other cluster covered only upsb and upsa vars. in addition there were and vars variants showed an expression maximum in the d line and pfswib line respectively red box. additional linear regression analysis of the correlation between qpcr and rnaseq data was performed to investigate the transcriptome data accuracy on var genes additional file figure s additional file table s . in the pfswib vs pfswib comparison the qpcr data showed a significant linear correlation with the rnaseq data r p . the rnaseq results of upregulated and downregulated upsb vars described above by qpcr analysis in the pfswib line were also reanalyzed by computing the log fold change of fpkm values in different lines. of these out of upregulated upsb vars except for pfd pfd pfd and pfd fig. red arrow and out of downregulated except for pfd fig. black arrow showed consistency with the qpcr results. additional file figure s shows the expression pattern and hierarchical clustering of all the vars in the three lines.according to previous studies var genes were highly expressed in the ring stage while drastically downregulated in the trophozoite stage . to confirm this we initially collected rna samples from the ring and trophozoite stages of the d clone within the third . approximately all of the var genes were downregulated at the mature stage of d sh and d sh parasite lines except for pfd upsa and pfd and pfd upsb suggesting that shield may have no influence on the expression of most var genes in a single hourlife cycle of p. falciparum additional file figure s .we subsequently analyzed the log ratio of tr in invitro cultured pfswib and pfswib lines within their third lifecycle after collecting rna samples from their synchronized ring and trophozoite parasites. among these parasite lines pfswib exhibited a quite similar log ratio of tr to d which was characterized by the downregulation of most var genes at the mature stage fig. . in contrast approximately all of the upsa vars as well as partial upsb pfd pfd pfd pfd and pfd and upsc pfd pfd and pfd vars were activated at the mature stage of p. falciparum in the pfswib line fig. .the interplay between altered histone modification chromatin modifying machinery and general or sequencespecific transcription factors results in var gene regulation by modulating chromatin structure . in this process atpdependent chromatin remodeling complexes crcs play a key role in chromatin remodeling through removal and movements of nucleosomes and deposition of alternative histones . there are at least proteins containing putative swisnf atpase catalytic domains in p. falciparum seven of which are predicted to be chromatinmodifying proteins including iswi swr chd snfl malp pfbw pffw and pf . however it remains unclear how these pfcrcs regulate var gene expression by remodeling certain chromatin and therefore resulting in a high level of antigenic variation immunity evasion and pathopoiesis.the swisnf complex originally revealed in yeasts allows for transcriptional activation by remodeling chromatin . it has also been demonstrated previously that mammalian swisnf homologs complexes also known as brgassociated factors bafs can be found in multiple forms which consist of proteins. among these bafs bafb exists in an alternative form of the swi snf complex complex b which is generally known as swib or swib . in humans the bafa protein of the swisnf complex is responsible for p binding and regulates its activities via an nterminal region of the swibmdm domain as well as facilitating cell cycle halting and tune the balance between repair and apoptosis induction . swibmdm domains have in fact been shown to participate in proteinprotein and chromatinrelated interactions but their functional roles in other species are poorly understood. similarly the swisnf complex is composed of constant units and includes the swppsnf protein comprising a swibmdm domain proposed to facilitate specificity andor functionality to some extent . according to recent studies the p. falciparum genome encodes two putative swibmdm domaincontaining proteins pfmdm pfd swibmdm domaincontaining protein and pfswib pfd swi snfrelated matrixassociated actindependent regulator of chromatin and pfswib was not only crucial for the survival and growth of the parasite but additionally had profound effects on the parasite by interacting with other unknown proteins . bioinformatics analysis demonstrated that pfswib is characterized by its swib domain bafb domain plasmodb httpplasm odb. org. bonger et al. have recently developed a new technique by which the degradation of a specific protein is definitely induced by way of a small molecule shield. hence an indepth functional analysis of pfswib based on the conditional knockdown assay was implemented in the present study. by using a transgenic assay drug screening and subsequent screening of the clones we obtained two integrated parasite clones pfswibc and b with a stable transfection of the modified locus pfswibfkbplid into the plasmodium parasites fig. additional file figure s . western blot analysis confirmed that the fusion expression protein was successfully expressed in the transfected parasite lines and there was a significant decrease of pfswib fusion protein expression in the pfswib line t p at its trophozoite stage within third lifecycle of p. falciparum. however it should be noted that no significant change was detected in the protein expression level of pfswib fusion system during the ring stage either in the presence or absence of drug pressure t p fig. b additional file figure s . this could be due to at least two reasons. first it takes time for shield to work at full capacity through binding to lid therefore a portion or slight loss of fused pfswib protein could not be identified. secondly this protein might be expressed predominantly at the mature stage of p. falciparum.it is worth noting that pfswib may lead to stagespecific pcd in the same way as bafa of the mammalian swisnf complex induces pdirected apoptosis by which transient nuclear localization results in removal of these parasites as previously described . vieira et al. further demonstrated that pfswib could have a stagespecific prosurvival function and takes part in the heat stress response of the plasmodium parasite. they discovered that pfswib and pfark participate in preventing pmediated apoptosis within the nucleus in reaction to heat stress . alternatively human aurora kinase b and its yeast homologue play key roles during gene transcription through histone h phosphorylation . likewise pfswib could also have an effect on parasite survival through transcriptional regulation by guiding the pfarks phosphorylation activities . in our study growth curve analysis of p. falciparum revealed that a relatively low parasitemia was observed in the pfswib knockdown line pfswib when compared to other parasite lines during their second lifecycle. significant change was observed after hours when the parasites developed into the third lifecycle. the parasitemia of pfswib showed a sharp decline fig. a suggesting that pfswib might play a key role in the proliferation and survival of p. falciparum.on the other hand jiang et al. proved that knocking out the p. falciparum variantsilencing set gene which encodes an ortholog of drosophila melanogaster ash and controls histone h lysine trimethylation hkme on var genes leads to expression of all vars. in another study focused on a novel chromatinassociated exoribonuclease termed pfrnase ii zhang et al. revealed that this pfrnase ii controls the silencing of upsa var genes by marking their transcription start site and intron promoter regions leading to shortlived cryptic rna. depletion of pfrnase ii specifically removes the silencing of upsa vars. similarly in the present study knocking down of pfswib results in the silencing of upsa upsc and partial upsb var genes as well as removes the silencing of partial upsb vars fig. additional file figure s . therefore pfswib might be one of the trans factors activating var genes especially the upsa vars and silencing partial upsb vars. in addition a few var genes exhibited inconsistent rnaseq results with qpcr especially the upsa vars. they are more likely to be conditionally activated in the pfswib knockdown line according to the rnaseq analysis fig. additional file figure s . the minor inconsistency between the rnaseq and the qpcr results for partial vars could be due to false positivesnegatives resulting from either of these two methods or experimental variation caused by different parasite lines or other unidentified factors. nevertheless by comparing the log fold change data from qpcr and rnaseq on var genes we confirmed that the linear regression and linear correlation analysis showed a significant linear correlation between the two methods r v p additional file figure s .furthermore previous studies have demonstrated that var genes were highly expressed in the ring stage of p. falciparum while drastically downregulated in the trophozoite stage. the var transcriptional levels in trophozoites are usually times less than those in rings . a single p. falciparum parasite simultaneously transcribes multiple var genes but selects only one pfemp to attain the surface of the host cell by way of a developmentally regulated process . in order to test whether the transcription pattern had been disrupted when knocking down pfswib we subsequently compared the transcription level of selected var genes between ring and trophozoite stage parasites by testing the log fold change of tr in each group during a single lifecycle of p. falciparum fig. additional file figure s . strikingly we discovered that most of the upsa upsb and upsc vars were downregulated in pfswib and d lines while virtually all the upsa vars and partial upsbupsc vars were significantly upregulated at the trophozoitestage of the pfswib line within the third lifecycle of p. falciparum fig. suggesting that pfswib might be involved in temporal regulation of var genes particularly group a vars. the dysfunction of pfswib could disrupt the interactions between pfswib and other transcription factors which are essential for gene silencing or inhibit pfswib activity through unknown mechanisms.as we mentioned previously p. falciparum varies its surface protein expression particularly the var gene familyencoded clonally variant surface protein expression to evade host immune responses . in the process of monoallelic expression specific silent var genes are usually retained at unique perinuclear sites and relocated to transcriptionally active zones . nuclear actin has been discovered complexed with pfset which has been suggested to play a role in the movement of the locus during activation and heterochromatic silencing . actin and actinrelated proteins arps are common components of chromatin remodeling complexes and are involved in nuclear positioning. according to biological characteristics pfswib may be involved in the process of relocating episomes as an actindependent regulator of chromatin. further studies regarding the possible role of pfswib and actin interaction would be worthwhile.in the present study we revealed that actinrelated chromatin remodeling factor pfswib is involved in the process of clonal variation in var gene expression and is crucial for the survival and growth of the plasmodium parasite. depletion of pfswib not only silences upsa upsc and partial upsb var genes and removes the silencing of partial upsb var genes but also leads to the aberrant expression of upsa and partial upsbupsc var genes at the mature stage of p. falciparum during a single hour lifecycle. these findings could provide a better understanding of the regulatory function of pfcrcs in regulating the clonal variation of the var gene family contributing to the pathogenesis in malaria parasites..