correlation between antimicrobial consumption and incidence of healthcare associated infections due to methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus and vancomycinresistant enterococci at a university hospital in taiwan from to .objectives this study was conducted to investigate the correlation between antibiotic consumption and the incidence of healthcareassociated infections hcais caused by methicillinresistant staphylococcus aureus mrsa hcaimrsa and vancomycinresistant enterococci vres hcaivres at a university hospital in taiwan during the period from to . methods data on annual patientdays and annual consumption defined daily dose patientdays of glycopeptides vancomycin and teicoplanin linezolid fusidic acid tigecycline and daptomycin were analyzed. yearly aggregated data on the number of nonduplicate clinical mrsa and vre isolates causing hcai were collected.journal of microbiology immunology and infection e aureusresults overall the consumption of teicoplanin and linezolid significantly increased during the study period. a significant decrease in the incidence of hcaimrsa and a significant increase in the incidence of hcaivre were found during the study period. a significant correlation was found between the increased use of teicoplanin and linezolid and the decreased incidence of hcaimrsa. by contrast positive correlations were found between the consumption of teicoplanin and tigecycline and the incidence of hcaivre.conclusion this study identified various correlations between the consumption of antibiotics and the incidence of hcaimrsa and hcaivre. strict implementation of infectioncontrol guidelines and reinforcement of administering appropriate antibiotic agents would be helpful in decreasing the incidence of mrsa and vre in hospitals..the incidence of healthcareassociated infection hcai caused by multidrugresistant bacteria has gradually risen during the last decade especially in immunocompromised patients. the most common causative agents of hcai in the united states are the grampositive bacteria staphylococcus aureus and enterococcus. methicillin oxacillinresistant s. aureus mrsa is of particular concern because patients with mrsa infection tend to have higher mortality rates longer hospital stays and higher healthcareassociated costs than patients with methicillinsusceptible s. aureus infections. in addition diazgranados et al found that the mortality rate among patients with vancomycinresistant enterococci vres infection was significantly higher than that among patients with vancomycinsusceptible enterococcus infections. taiwan is no exception and vre and mrsa infections have become emerging infectious diseases. e antibiotic use is one of the risk factors for antibiotic resistance among bacterial species however the nature of this relationship is complicated. although several studies have examined the relationship between antimicrobial consumption and antibiotic resistance the findings were inconsistent possibly due to differences in resistance profiles as well as due to differences in antibioticprescribing practices in different countries. e in those studies the use of glycopeptides extendedspectrum cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones was demonstrated to be associated with the prevalence of mrsa and vre. e few studies however have investigated the relationship between the use of linezolid or fusidic acid and the prevalence of mrsa and vre. in addition the association between the consumption of tigecycline a novel antigrampositive agent derived from minocycline that has been shown to be effective against many gramnegative rods as well as grampositive cocci and the prevalence of mrsa and vre has never been studied. similarly no studies have so far investigated the association between the prevalence of mrsa and vre and the consumption of daptomycin an antimrsa antibiotic that has been approved by the u.s. food and drug administration for the treatment of complicated skin and skinstructure infections and bacteremia due to mrsa. in this study we investigated the correlation between consumption of antibiotics including vancomycin teicoplanin linezolid tigecycline fusidic acid and daptomycin and the incidence of hcaimrsa and hcaivre during the period from to at a medical center in taiwan.the national taiwan university hospital ntuh is a bed academically affiliated medical center that provides both primary and tertiary care in northern taiwan. the number of annual inpatientdays at the hospital increased from in to in . linezolid and fusidic acid were introduced into the hospital formulary in . tigecycline and daptomycin have been prescribed at the ntuh since and respectively. some of the data analyzed in this study were included in a previous study. bacterial isolates data on the susceptibilities of s. aureus to oxacillin were collected during the period from to . these isolates were nonduplicate and isolates of each species from each patient recovered within days were considered as a single isolate. susceptibility testing for s. aureus and enterococcus species followed the clinical and laboratory standards institute guidelines. s. aureus atcc was used as the control strain for routine disksusceptibility testing. methicillin resistance among s. aureus isolates was routinely screened by measuring their growth on oxacillin mgl in naclcontaining trypticase soy agar plate that had been incubated in ambient air at c for hours. vancomycin resistance among enterococcus species was confirmed by growth of the isolate on a brain heart infusion agar plate containing vancomycin mgl that had been incubated in ambient air at c for hours. yearly aggregated data on the number of nonduplicate clinical mrsa and vre isolates causing hcai were collected. hcai was defined according to the national nosocomial infection surveillance guidelines. the incidence rates of hcaimrsa and hcaivre were defined as the number of patients with hcaimrsa and hcaivre respectively per inpatientdays.data on annual consumption defined daily dose ddd inpatientdays of glycopeptides vancomycin and teicoplanin linezolid fusidic acid tigecycline and daptomycin from to were obtained from the pharmacy department of the hospital.linear regression analysis was used to analyze the trends in annual consumption of antimicrobial agents and the trends in incidence of hcaimrsa and hcaivre over time. the pearson product moment correlation coefficient was used to determine the relationship between annual antibiotic consumption and trends in resistance. a p value was considered statistically significant.in general the use of each antimicrobial agent varied over time table . overall the consumption of teicoplanin and linezolid significantly increased whereas the consumption of vancomycin glycopeptides including vancomycin and teicoplanin tigecycline and fusidic acid remained stable during the study period.trend in hcai due to mrsa and vre and the incidence of hcaimrsa and hcaivre during the period eduring the study period a total of nonduplicate s. aureus isolates and enterococcal isolates causing hcai were identified. fig. a shows the trends in mrsa isolates and incidence of hcaimrsa. there was a significant decrease in the incidence of hcaimrsa over time. fig. b shows the trends in vre isolates and the incidence of hcaivre. a significant rise in the incidence of hcaivre over time was noted.data on the correlation between the incidence of hcaimrsa the incidence of hcaivre and the annual consumption of vancomycin teicoplanin linezolid fusidic acid tigecycline and daptomycin are shown in tables and . a significant correlation was found between the increased use of linezolid and teicoplanin and the decreased prevalence of mrsa. by contrast no significant correlation was found between the increased use of vancomycin glycopeptides vancomycin and teicoplanin tigecycline and fusidic acid and the incidence of hcaimrsa. there was however a positive correlation between the incidence of hcaivre and the use of teicoplanin and tigecycline.this study evaluated the association between antibiotic consumption and the incidence of hcaimrsa and hcaivre in a medical center in taiwan during an year period. . analyzed the disease density per patientdays due to resistant bacteria rather than resistance rate. this parameter density is now considered more appropriate to present the real situation. in addition we evaluated two newly available antibiotics tigecycline and daptomycin and the relationship with disease density. using this new analysis and adding some new data we had several significant novel findings.we found that the consumption of teicoplanin and linezolid significantly increased during the study period however the consumption of vancomycin glycopeptides both vancomycin and teicoplanin and fusidic acid remained stable. it is speculated that physicians in the hospital are more likely to prescribe teicoplanin and linezolid than vancomycin for the treatment of mrsa infections because teicoplanin and linezolid are associated with fewer side effects such as renal toxicity. in addition the consumption of tigecycline increased from ddd inpatientdays in to ddd inpatientdays in . however although the consumption of both tigecycline and daptomycin increased over time there was no significant association between the consumption of those antimicrobial agents and the incidence of nosocomial mrsa infections during the study period. longterm studies are needed to evaluate the trend in hcaimrsa infections associated with the consumption of tigecycline and daptomycin.although the relationship between the incidence of mrsa and the use of blactam antibiotics and fluoroquinolones has been investigated e few studies have focused on the association between consumption of glycopeptides linezolid and fusidic acid and the incidence of infection due to grampositive bacteria. in this study we found that the incidence of infections due to mrsa significantly decreased from inpatientdays in to inpatientdays in . in addition we noted a negative correlation between the use of teicoplanin and linezolid and the incidence of hcaimrsa. although further research is needed to clarify this association our findings suggest that teicoplanin and linezolid might exert a protective effect against the emergence of mrsa. we also found that there was no significant correlation between the consumption of vancomycin glycopeptides including vancomycin and teicoplanin and fusidic acid and incidence of hcaimrsa a finding that is consistent with that reported in our previous study. in addition the consumption of tigecycline and daptomycin was not associated with the incidence of hcaimrsa. the reason for that finding is most likely due to the short duration of tigecycline and daptomycin use in our hospital. a longer study period is needed to clarify the correlation between those two antimicrobial agents and the incidence of mrsa infections.our data show that the incidence of hcaivre significantly increased during the study period. we found that the increase in use of teicoplanin positively correlated with the increase in incidence of hcaivre. this finding is consistent with that in our previous study. by contrast we found that there was a negative correlation between the use of teicoplanin and the incidence of hcaimrsa. our data also show a positive correlation between the consumption of tigecycline and the incidence of hcaivre. although tigecycline was used for only years in this study the strong positive correlation between its use and the incidence of vre infections implies that tigecycline should be administered with caution.this study has several limitations. although we found a significant correlation between antibiotic use and the incidence of hcaimrsa the etiology behind the emergence of drugresistant bacteria in our hospital is complicated and selective pressure from widespread use of antimicrobial agents might be only one of the causes. the prevalence of mrsa could have been affected by multiple factors such as infectioncontrol measures and hand hygiene or operational changes in the hospital. after the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome in the infection prevention and control program at the ntuh was upgraded to include hand hygiene antibioticcontrol policies and an annual intensive projectbased control program. in fact it has been demonstrated that those policies are directly associated with the decrease in rates of hcais and bloodstream infections at the ntuh. however those effects were not measured in this study. whether those policies had an impact on mrsa trends remains unknown. in addition because this was an epidemiological surveillance study we did not analyze the impact that duration of exposure to antibiotics or clonal spread of resistant bacteria had on the trend in incidence of nosocomial mrsa infection. furthermore the overall ddd of a given antibiotic is a notoriously problematic denominator as there will be changes in lowdose usage in specific groups of patients i.e. children and patients with renal insufficiency. therefore an analysis using number of prescriptions for those patient groups would be more appropriate. however the impact should be limited in this study because those specific patient groups comprised only a small fraction of the study patients and the effect would be diluted and equal in each year.in conclusion in this year study in a single medical institution we found that the use of teicoplanin and linezolid significantly increased. furthermore we found a negative correlation between the usage of individual antibiotics such as teicoplanin and linezolid and the incidence of hcaimrsa. however we also found a positive correlation between consumption of teicoplanin and tigecycline and the incidence of hcaivre. therefore strict implementation of infectioncontrol policies including administration of appropriate antimicrobial agents may be positively correlated with a decrease in the presence of mrsa in hospitals..