full title a systematic review of merscov middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus seroprevalence and viral rna prevalence in dromedary camels implications for animal vaccination..since the first human case of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus merscov infection was detected in a substantial evidence base has built up showing dromedary camels to be the zoonotic source of this virus . merscov circulates extensively in dromedary populations causing no impactful disease. human infection however is associated with a measured case fatality ratio of around . following spillover events humantohuman transmission of merscov is relatively inefficient and limited to close unprotected contact environments such as hospitals .phylogenetic analysis of viral sequences isolated from dromedaries and humans indicates that hundreds of cameltohuman spillover events are likely to have occurred since . taken together recurring dromedarytohuman transmission is driving ongoing human infection.the key role of dromedaries in human merscov infection has led decisionmakers to consider dromedary vaccination as part of merscov prevention interventions . dromedarytargeted additionally although wholevirus isolation and culture is necessary to confirm whether the shedding is infectious detection of viral rna through rtpcr can be used as a proxy for the prevalence and distribution of infectious dromedaries .by conducting a qualitative synthesis of the study findings considering reported heterogeneities and summarising the results of longitudinal studies of infection and immunity we aim to assess the extent of current understanding of merscov epidemiology in dromedaries implications for control and gaps to be addressed going forward. we note that a similar systematic review of the literature up untilmay was unknowingly carried out in parallel to our own with no discussion between the two groups. here we confirm and update the results of the parallel review discussing our results in the context of potential animal vaccination and mathematical modelling of merscov in dromedary camels. f. neutralisation at dilution gave seropositivity but regional range only available for elisa results reported accordingly g. study also tested different sitetypes but measured rna in serum sample rather than nasal swab so this was not included h. range is across weeks rather than regions i. both and fig . uae farm uae j j uae although seroprevalence was in adult dromedaries in most populations across the middle three studies have found dromedaries to be shedding merscov rna despite having high antibody titres months or weeks prior to detectable infection. both older animals whose antibodies reflect past exposure and young calves whose high antibody titres were maternallyacquired immediately postpartum became infected .one study directly observed recurring infection amongst a herd of dromedaries in egypt.four animals were shedding months prior to a herdwide epidemic in which they were agedependent seroprevalence patterns suggest that the higher prevalence of viral shedding in juveniles compared with adults is likely due to immunological naivety. the age distribution of reported infections synthesised here suggests that contact with juveniles may pose greater risks of human transmission than adults making them potential targets for vaccination. however frequency of human contact with dromedaries may also be animal respiratory syndrome coronavirus specific antibodies in naturally exposed israeli llamas alpacas and camels. one health. . .