..the life of children and their parents golberstein et al. wang et al. b especially for families of young children who need consistent care. however few studies have focused on children and their parents psychological responses during the covid pandemic. a preliminary study conducted in china during the pandemic showed that children between the ages of and years were more likely to manifest symptoms such as clinginess and fears about the pandemic while children aged years were more likely to show inattention and persistent inquiry jiao et al. .sleep is crucial for adults and childrens physical and psychosocial wellbeing gregory sadeh . the current stressful circumstances of home confinement and major changes to daily routines higher levels of anxiety decrease in daylight exposure increased blue light exposure due to massive reliance on digital media changes in diet and reduced physical activity may all have negative implications for sleep quality altena et al. becker gregory . a recent study exploring sleep health among an adult greek population during the covid crisis voitsidis et al. showed that of the participants scored above the cutoff score for insomnia which is significantly greater than the worldwide insomnia prevalence estimated before the pandemic riemann et al. . these results emphasise the possible effects of the changes imposed by the covid crisis on insomnia a disorder associated with increased risk of chronic illnesses poor mental health functional limitations and cognitive decline riemann et al. . another study conducted recently among an italian population found that during home confinement sleep timing markedly changed with people going to bed and waking up later spending more time in bed and reporting a lower sleep quality. the increase in sleep difficulties was more pronounced in people with a higher level of depression and anxiety cellini et al. .despite the marked impact of the covid pandemic on the life of families and its possible negative implications on sleep little is known about how sleep among parents and children has been impacted by the current crisis. previous studies conducted during conventional times have documented strong links between poorer maternal sleep quality and childrens sleep disturbances tikotzky et al. . furthermore lower maternal sleep quality and poorer infant sleep as reported by the mother have been shown to be related to higher levels of maternal anxiety goldberg et al. okun et al. .we are aware of only one study that examined sleep patterns of children during the covid crisis. in this recent study sleep patterns and sleep disturbances of chinese preschoolers were studied during the covid home confinement. the findings showed that children demonstrated changes in sleep patterns characterised by later bedtimes and wake times and longer nocturnal and shorter nap sleep durations compared to childrens sleep patterns in noncrisis time. in addition modifiable behavioural practices e.g. reduced electronic device use regular diet and positive family environment were associated with less sleep disturbances in the confined sample.in the present study we addressed for the first time possible consequences of the covid crisis and home confinement on maternal reports of their anxiety sleep and their childrens sleep patterns aged months in israel. the specific aims of the study were a to explore whether mothers experienced a change in their own insomnia symptoms and childs sleep during the current crisis compared to precrisis period retrospectively reported b to assess maternal levels of acute and c to explore the associations between childs sleep maternal insomnia and maternal acute covid anxiety.mothers of children boys with a mean sd range age of crisis. table shows the demographic characteristics of the sample.we conducted an anonymous webbased study during the covid crisis from to april weeks into the national lockdown in israel. in response to the covid outbreak the israeli government ordered a nationwide school closure and prevented all forms of public activities as an emergency measure to prevent the spread of the infection. people were instructed to stay at home with permission to leave home only for necessities e.g. food medicine.the study was approved by the ethical committee of the maxstern yezreel valley college. there was no compensation for participation.participants were reached through social media platforms while the only inclusion criterion was having a child aged between and months. in case of having more than one child in this age range mothers were instructed to report on the youngest child. the survey took min to complete. all respondents were included in the data analysis. overall the percentage of missing data was minor and thus no special handling of missing data was conducted.the insomnia severity index isi is a sevenitem selfreport questionnaire assessing the nature severity and impact of insomnia based on a point scale. scores range from to with as a cutoff for clinical insomnia. the alpha coefficient in the current sample was . morin .mothers were asked to complete the isi with reference to two time points a retrospectively months before the covid outbreak in israel and b during home confinement. we then computed for each mother a score representing the mothers perception of change in her sleep quality isi isi during covid minus isi before covid. higher values indicate a higher increase of insomnia symptoms. i.e. childs crib located in separate room childs crib attached to parents bed childs crib located in parents room in parents bed b bedtime soothing method i.e. child falling asleep independently in childs crib in childs crib with parental assistance in parents bed out of bed while breastfeedingbeing rockedbeing held sadeh .for the purposes of the present study we added questions regarding the perceived change in childs sleep during home confinement. mothers were asked whether their childs sleep quality and duration had changed using a point scale ranging from major increase in sleep qualityduration to major decrease in sleep qualityduration. the questions were also related to change in sleeping arrangements settling to sleep and change in the degree to which mothers perceived their childs sleep as problematic. regarding the last three questions mothers were asked to indicate whether there was a change or not yesno.this scale assesses the relatively stable aspects of anxiety proneness. it includes items with scores ranging between and .higher scores indicate greater anxiety with as a clinical cutoff.the alpha coefficient in the current sample was . spielberger et al. .mothers responded to a question assessing their degree of anxiety specific to the current covid crisis. this item was rated on a point scale. higher points indicate a higher level of acute covid anxiety. this item was developed for an independent study addressing the impact of the covid crisis among the israeli population unpublished data.no significant correlations were found between the sociodemographic variables e.g. mothers age and income level and the studys main variables maternal insomnia and childs sleep as reported by the mother during the covid pandemic retrospectively before the pandemic and the change variables. thus the demographic variables were not controlled for in subsequent analyses except for childs age due to the wide age range in this study and the important role of maturation in sleep development. household monthly income new israeli shekel nis roughly nis nis nis nis over nis roughly . the change in income was assessed using yesno question yes represents a change in family income due to covid crisis and no represents no change in family income due to covid crisis.moreover no differences were found in the studys variables between arabic and jewish participants so they were combined into one group.descriptive statistics for the sleep measures according to the brief infantchild sleep questionnaire are described in table .almost of mothers reported a negative change in their childs sleep quality during home confinement while reported no change and reported a positive change.a total of of the mothers reported a decrease in their childs sleep duration during home confinement while reported no change and reported an increase.a total of of the mothers reported a change in their childs sleeping arrangement and reported a change in the way the child falls asleep.the majority of mothers reported no change in their perceptions.overall of the mothers reported a negative change in their sleep quality. in all of mothers scored above the clinical cutoff for insomnia isi score of during the covid crisis compared to only who reported retrospectively having clinical insomnia before the covid crisis p ..there was no difference in the proportion of mothers with a subclinical score before and during the pandemic mothers retrospectively reported not having insomnia before the pandemic compared to who reported no insomnia during the pandemic. however this difference was not significant p . figure .the average level of maternal trait anxiety was sd and of mothers scored above the clinical cutoff .the prevalence of acute covid anxiety was as follows reported mild levels of anxiety and reported high levels of anxiety.we examined the correlations between a maternal insomnia and childs sleep variables and b maternal acute covid anxiety and motherchild sleep. as presented in f i g u r e differences in the number of mothers reporting not having insomnia symptoms subclinical insomnia symptoms and clinical insomnia symptoms before retrospectively reported and during the covid crisis. p . p. respectively while the correlations with childs sleep latency and sleep duration were no longer significant.the correlation between maternal acute covid anxiety and the current maternal isi score was significant r . p . and remained significant after controlling for the childs sleep duration number of night awakenings and waso r . p ..the change in childs sleep quality was associated with the change in isi score of the mother r s . p . so that mothers who reported that their childs sleep improved during the covid crisis were more likely to report a decrease in their own insomnia symptoms during the crisis. a similar result was found regarding the change in childs sleep duration and maternal change in isi r s . p . so that mothers who reported that their childs sleep duration increased during the covid crisis were more likely to report a decrease in their own insomnia symptoms.to assess whether anxiety levels i.e. covid acute anxiety and mothers trait anxiety are different for mothers with no change in sleep quality compared to mothers who reported a negative change in sleep quality oneway ancovas were conducted. because of the large age range in our sample childs age was controlled for.significant betweengroup differences were found in covidacute anxiety levels f p . partial so that mothers with an increase in insomnia symptoms showed significantly higher levels of covid acute anxiety. no significant betweengroup differences were found for maternal trait anxiety figure .to assess whether anxiety levels i.e. covid acute anxiety and mothers trait anxiety are different for mothers who reported no change in their childrens sleep quality compared to mothers who reported such a change a oneway ancova was conducted with childs age as a covariate. significant betweengroup differences were found in maternal trait anxiety f p . partial so that mothers who reported that their childs sleep had negatively changed had higher levels of trait anxiety compared to mothers who reported no change in their childs sleep. no significant betweengroup differences were found in covid acute anxiety figure .to the best of our knowledge the present study is the first to address the possible implications of the covid crisis and associated home confinement on maternal acute anxiety maternal insomnia symptoms and maternal reports of young childrens sleep. focussing on mothers and children we found that many mothers are experiencing an average increase in insomnia severity and mildhigh levels of acute covid anxiety. the present study revealed a high frequency of clinical insomnia during the covid pandemic of mothers scored above the cutoff for insomnia during the covid brooks et al. qiu et al. .our present findings are consistent with previous studies demonstrating significant links between maternal and child sleep quality tikotzky et al. . the present findings show that these links are relevant also in times of crises as mothers who reported higher scores of insomnia during the current covid crisis were also more likely to report that their children had poorer sleep quality and shorter sleep duration. moreover our present results support previous research on the relations between maternal emotional distress and motherchild sleep goldberg et al. okun et al. by demonstrating that also in times of crises mothers with higher acute covid anxiety have higher insomnia symptoms and children with lower reported sleep quality.we further observed that mothers with severe insomnia symptoms isi score of had significantly higher levels of acute the present study has several limitations that should be considered given the complexity of conducting a study under crises conditions and home confinement. first the crosssectional design and relying on retrospective selfreports to assess sleep before the pandemic limit the ability to make inferences and increase the risk of a reporting bias. moreover the sample size was relatively small which limits the generalisability of our present results.notwithstanding these limitations our preliminary results highlight the importance of considering changes to sleep within the family context during the ongoing covid crisis.the results of the present study indicate that many mothers of data available on request from the authors.f i g u r e differences in anxiety levels i.e. acute covid anxiety and mothers trait anxiety between mothers reporting no change in their childrens sleep quality compared to mothers reporting a negative change in their childrens sleep quality during the covid crisis. p . p..