covid and its modes of transmission.the world health organization recognized sarscov as a public health concern and declared it as a pandemic on march . over million people have been affected across several countries since it was first recognized. sarscov is thought to commonly spread via respiratory droplets formed while talking coughing and sneezing of an infected patient. as several cases with an absence of travel history to the majorly affected areas were identified a strong possibility of community transmission could have been possible. broadly two modes of transmission of covid existdirect and indirect. the direct mode includes transmission via aerosols formed via surgical and dental procedures andor in the form of respiratory droplet nuclei other body fluids and secretions for example feces saliva urine semen and tears and mothertochild. indirect transmission may occur via fomites or surfaces e.g. furniture and fixtures present within the immediate environment of an infected patient and objects used on the infected person e.g. stethoscope or thermometer. as many of these modes may be underestimated it is necessary to emphasize and illustrate them. the goal of this paper is to briefly review how sarscov is shown to transmit via various modes and propose measures to reduce the risk of spread within the population and operating personnel..coronavirus disease covid caused by severe acute respiratory distress syndromecoronavirus sarscov was initially reported in december as pneumonia with unknown etiology in wuhan city of china. the world health organization recognized sarscov as a public health concern and declared it as a pandemic on march . over million people have been affected across several countries since it was first recognized . the disease unless combined with other comorbidities or other preexisting diseases is usually mild. approximately of cases require acute medical aid . broadly two modes of transmission of covid existdirect and indirect . the direct mode includes transmission via aerosols formed via surgical and dental procedures andor in the form of respiratory droplet nuclei other body fluids and secretions for example feces saliva urine semen and tears and mothertochild. sarscov is thought to commonly spread via respiratory droplets formed while talking coughing and sneezing of an infected person. the exposure and hence risk of transmission are increased if the infected person is present within m length of susceptible host. less number of infected patients has shown to shed virus from sources other than the respiratory tract. though not high the risk of transmission this article is part of the topical collection on covid through modes other than respiratory tract can still be possible. indirect transmission may occur via fomites or surfaces e.g. furniture and fixtures present within the immediate environment of an infected patient and objects used on the infected person e.g. stethoscope or thermometer . several of these modes may be underestimated and cause increased spread of virus. the goal of this paper is to briefly review how sarscov is shown to transmit via various modes and propose measures to reduce the risk of spread within the population and operating personnel.an electronic search was conducted in the months of may and june for manuscripts on possible modes of transmission of sarscov. primary databases that were used for the search are who pubmed and google scholar. the search strategy used the keywords modes transmission spread coronavirus covid and their combination.the final review articles fulfilled the following criteria. reported modes of transmission in the laboratoryproven covid patients . included patient data regardless of age gender or location . full text peerreviewed articles . articles in english articles that did not contain patient data or studies pertaining to sarscov and mers were excluded. each paper was reviewed by two reviewers independently and disagreements were discussed and resolved via a consensus.data was collected in the following categories when availablewe tabulated the data using microsoft excel. referencing was done according to guidelines using endnote.this study did not require ethical approval as data was obtained from already available databases and patients were not directly involved.the outbreak of sarscov occurred in wuhan china and soon a large number of residents and the tourists visiting the city contracted the virus. however overtime several cases with an absence of travel history to the majorly affected areas were identified hence raising a strong possibility of community transmission and necessitating the need to explore various ways by which the virus may be transmitted. interestingly a number of modes were identified other than respiratory tract secretions fig. .airborne transmission via aerosols formation is suspected to be the main mode of transmission. aerosols are particles under m in diameter . thus their minute size and suspension in the air may ease direct contraction of the virus. aerosols may be formed during various surgical and dental procedures or may be formed as droplet nuclei while talking coughing and sneezing by an infected patient. in a study by li et al. eight healthcare staff and five postoperational patients tested positive for covid after being in close contact with an infected patient. this suggests that droplet formation serves as a potent mode for humantohuman transmission . in the same study li et al. also suggested that cough training respiratory exercise which is done postoperatively produces a large number of droplets and aerosols in the surrounding space. this increases the amount of exposure and thus the risk of virus transmission . dentists are at a higher risk of exposure as dental patients are required to spit or gargle after oral procedures like extraction drilling and drainage of dental abscess. thus these aerosolproducing procedures must be performed using appropriate protective equipment.ong et al. studied several samples taken from the furniture and fixtures from an infected patients room before routine cleaning of the room . interestingly all the samples returned positive for the virus. work by doremalen et al. demonstrated that aerosolized sarscov remains viable in the aerosols for h and on different surfaces for h . thus virus may be transmitted to those touching the contaminated surfaces fomites. fomites may be regarded as an indirect way of humantohuman transmission. measures including strict precautions and adequate protective devices and infection control training should be implemented for all hospital workers for such circumstances.gastrointestinal tract may be regarded as another potent mode of transmission. huang et al. reported a covid positive family cluster wherein anal swabs taken from both the cases were persistently positive sarscov . xing et al. studied patients for persistent fecal shedding of virus in stools. they found that viral shedding in the stools occurred despite resolution of the symptoms and radiological findings while samples from nasopharynx andor oropharynx were also negative for viral nucleic acid . similarly fan et al. reported an infant with covid who continued to test positive in the anal swabs even after days of testing negative by the nasopharyngeal swab test . this raises the need to include testing of feces or anal swab or rectal swab samples for possible presence of virus prior to discharge. sharing of toilets may risk transmission of virus.less data is available on other body fluids and secretions other than respiratory secretions of infected patients testing positive for the virus. these include saliva urine semen and tears. in the study by azzi et al. salivary samples of two patients proved positive while their respiratory swabs showed negative results on the same day . virus may migrate from the nasopharynx but may be present in the oral cavity as the epithelial cells of the oral mucosa show a high expression of angiotensinconverting enzyme ace receptors . ren et al. found that urine of an asymptomatic patient was positive for viral nucleic acid and concluded that urine may serve as a mode of virus transmission . valente et al. identified conjunctival swabs from three of the patients with ocular manifestations tested positive for covid while gemesvillahoz et al. identified only one patient with the presence of viral rna in the tears . despite the low prevalence and rapid regression of viral presence in the conjunctiva sarscov transmission through tears may be possible even in patients without apparent ocular involvement. of note li et al. found that semen of cases tested positive for sarscov . thus the authors suggest that the presence of virus in semen may raise suspicion of sexual transmission of virus.in a study by yu et al. one of the seven neonates tested positive for sarscov after h of birth . on the contrary all the neonates born to pregnant women included in the two studies by khan et al. and li et al. tested negative for virus and thus could not find any evidence of vertical transmission . authors conclude that transmission from mothertochild may be rare but not completely absent. further data is needed to find the details on this mode of transmission. transmission from mothertochild can be prevented by delivering the neonates in negative pressure isolation rooms. newborns may also be infected postdelivery via breastfeeding or via inhalation of droplets produced by infected parents andor healthcare professionals. protective measures like mothers and all healthcare staff wearing protective suits and masks at all times while being around the newborns may mitigate transmission. inculcating appropriate hygiene measures transferring the newborns to the neonatology department after birth and avoiding prolonged exposure of the neonate to family members becomes of utmost importance.however our review consists of several limitations. the included studies are mainly from china italy spain and singapore. thus data from other majorly affected demographic areas would contribute in a better understanding of virus transmission. number of patients in the included studies was relatively small. hence samples from a bigger and diverse population are needed to gain adequate details on transmission as well as duration and source of viral shedding postresolution of symptoms. covid has a very high infectivity rate. two modes of transmission existdirect and indirect. the direct mode includes transmission via aerosols anal fecooral secretions tears saliva semen and mothertochild. indirect modes include transmission via fomites. several of these modes may be underestimated and thus risk the spread of virus. to contain the spread of the virus it is imperative to reduce humantohuman contact disinfection of daytoday objects and proper selfhygiene washing hands regularly proper coughing and sneezing techniques and use of face masks. social distancing plays a key role in reducing transmission. sarscov has impacted medical practice to a great extent. the use of personal protective equipment among health professionals is essential to reduce the risk of transmission. knowledge about sarscov is still rapidly evolving and a greater number of studies are required to assess other potential modes of transmission..