laboratorybased surveillance of hospitalacquired respiratory virus infection in a tertiary care hospital.of laboratoryconfirmed cases of respiratory viral infection among hospitalized patients were categorized as having hospitalacquired infection. the overall incidence of hospitalacquired respiratory viral infection was confidence interval cases per admitted patients. rhinovirus was the most common virus followed by influenza virus and parainfluenza virus ..the human respiratory viruses include adenovirus bocavirus human coronaviruses enterovirus influenza viruses human metapneumovirus parainfluenza virus respiratory syncytial virus and rhinovirus. although respiratory viruses are mainly recognized as causes of communityacquired infections they can also cause serious hospitalacquired respiratory infections and may be responsible for hospital outbreaks. their relatively short incubation times and efficient transmission via small droplets among comorbid patients highlight the need for better understanding of respiratory viral infections in hospital settings. however very limited published data are available on the overall epidemiologic characteristics of hospitalacquired infection caused by respiratory viruses especially by viruses other than influenza viruses. therefore using laboratorybased surveillance we investigated the overall incidence and related factors of hospitalacquired respiratory virus infections.this study was performed at a bed tertiary care universityaffiliated hospital between january and december . all admitted patients who had positive test results for respiratory virus polymerase chain reaction pcr were prospectively identified and monitored until their discharge or release from isolation. performance of the pcr test for respiratory viruses was at the discretion of the attending physician. outpatients and patients discharged in the emergency room were not included. respiratory viruses were detected by multiplex reversetranscription pcr assay using a seeplex rv ace detection kit seegene seoul korea january october or anyplex ii rv detection kit seegene november december . the performance of those pcr kits used in this study has been evaluated in a published study. the proportion of hospitalacquired respiratory viral infections was calculated for all viruses. the incidence of such infections was calculated as the number of cases per admissions and as cases per patient days. this study was approved by the institutional review board of asan medical center.during the study period there were admissions and a total of respiratory viral pcr tests were conducted. table shows the variation of the number of study subjects from year to year. a total of nonduplicative pcrpositive cases were identified. of these were categorized as having hospitalacquired infections. a total of viruses were identified viruses were identified in patients viruses were identified in patients and viruses were identified in patient. of the viruses identified were positive for rhinovirus were positive for influenza virus comprising with influenza a and with influenza b were positive for parainfluenza virus were positive for respiratory syncytial virus were positive for human coronavirus were positive for human metapneumovirus were positive for bocavirus were positive for adenovirus and were positive for enterovirus. the proportion of hospitalacquired infections was highest in human coronavirus followed by parainfluenza virus influenza virus rhinovirus respiratory syncytial virus bocavirus human metapneumovirus enterovirus and adenovirus . the median length of hospital stay prior to contracting a respiratory viral infection was days interquartile range days.the overall incidence of hospitalacquired respiratory virus infections was cases per admissions confidence interval and cases per patient days confidence interval . the incidences of such infections according to the year sex age group ward and virus type are summarized in table . the incidences ranged from cases per admissions with the highest incidence in the year . patients years were more likely to develop hospitalacquired respiratory virus infections. the incidence of such infections was highest in intensive care units icus followed by medical wards and surgical wards. of the icu cases the median days of icu stay before viral infection was days interquartile range . allcause day mortality day mortality and inhospital mortality were and respectively.the seasonal distribution of hospitalacquired respiratory viruses among hospitalized patients was similar to that of communityacquired infections supplementary fig s .we found that hospitalacquired respiratory viral infections commonly occurred in a tertiary care hospital. despite the inherent limitations of laboratorybased surveillance which underestimated the disease burden of respiratory viral infections of hospitalized patients were categorized as hospitalacquired events and various respiratory viruses were responsible. our study is notable in that we included yearround data from consecutive years and provided the admission daysadjusted incidence for each infection. data on hospitalacquired respiratory virus infections are still very scarce mostly confined to influenza virus infections. a canadian group reported that among hospitalized patients in canadian hospitals of influenza virus infections were health careassociated infections. a german group recently reported the proportion of hospitalacquired influenza virus infection as . our rate of such infections was somewhat higher than prior reports. our inclusion of pediatric patients may have been responsible for this. of note the influenza virus was responsible for only of all hospitalacquired respiratory viral infections. that is most cases were caused by respiratory viruses other than the influenza virus and which have received much less attention. these findings highlight the importance of yearround surveillance and infection control measures for various respiratory viruses beyond the influenza virus.according to our results the incidence of hospitalacquired respiratory virus infections has increased in recent years. we speculate that increased numbers of prescriptions for pcr tests for hospitalized patients are responsible for this finding. that means that clinicians are increasingly aware of respiratory viral infection as one of the important causes of hospitalacquired infection. the use of more sensitive pcr kits in recent years may also have affected the incidence of respiratory viral infection. however because the reported sensitivities of the assays and respectively are similar the impact of changes in the pcr kits is not likely to have been substantial. surprisingly the incidence of respiratory virus infections was highest in icus. considering the brevity of icu stays median days before the detection of viruses it is probable that most of the cases were hospitalacquired lower respiratory tract infections that occurred in wards not in the icus. these findings are consistent with those of a spanish group which showed that during the influenza season of critical patients with suspected lower respiratory tract infections had influenza of which were hospital acquired. it has also been reported that respiratory viruses were responsible for of cases of severe hospitalacquired pneumonia requiring icu admission in adults. these results strongly suggest that hospitalacquired infections caused by respiratory viruses could lead to serious consequences.this study had several limitations. first it was performed at a single large tertiary care hospital. our study population included a substantial number of immunocompromised patients who were susceptible to infection which likely biased our results. second some patients categorized as having hospitalacquired infections may have been already carrying respiratory viruses at the time of admission. finally the indications for conducting pcr tests for respiratory viruses were not standardized across the hospital and the detailed significance of pcrpositive cases was not analyzed.in conclusion hospitalacquired respiratory viral infections are commonly encountered among hospitalized patients. hospital surveillance of respiratory viruses should be considered to identify infected patients early and to prevent intrahospital transmission of respiratory viruses..