..extracorporeal membrane oxygenation or ecmo is a resourceintensive therapy that provides cardiopulmonary support in refractory cardiac and respiratory failure. it serves as a recourse in patients with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome ards who fail to respond to optimal mechanical ventilation and medical management in the intensive care unit icu. at the time of writing this article the world is dealing with a global pandemic of coronavirus disease covid resulting from the novel human rna coronavirus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus sars cov. covid is a multisystem disease with the respiratory system being the most commonly involved. patients with covid display a wide spectrum of symptoms that ranges from asymptomatic infection to fever cough flulike illness ards multiorgan failure and death. the management of critical patients with covid is challenging. we report a case of a young male patient with severe ards from covid who successfully recovered with ecmo and was discharged home after a hospital stay of days. this case was also the first case at our institution to be initiated on ecmo for covidrelated ards.a yearold male with a past medical history of diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department ed of our hospital with worsening shortness of breath for a few days. he was known to be covid positive from an outside clinic just days before presentation. he denied any other symptoms including chills fever and sweats. on examination he was diaphoretic tachycardic tachypneic anxious and lung sounds were notable for crackles. the patient was severely hypoxemic with oxygen saturation of on room air. he was placed on a nonrebreather mask following which the spo oxygen saturation had increased to to . other vital signs were a blood pressure of mm hg heart rate of min respiratory rate of min and temperature of c. initial laboratory tests were significant for creactive protein of mgdl lactic acid of mmoll white blood cells of l without lymphopenia blood glucose of mgdl procalcitonin of ngml and troponin of ngml. venous blood gas revealed a ph of pco partial pressure of carbon dioxide of mm hg and hco bicarbonate of mmoll. an electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm without st changes or t wave changes. his initial chest xray cxr showed mild diffuse bilateral pulmonary consolidations figure . he was intubated in the ed and transferred to the covid icu. his nasopharyngeal swab was positive for covid.the patient was provided the standard ards treatment with lungprotective ventilation pronation neuromuscular blockade with rocuronium and inhaled epoprostenol. his initial ventilator settings were pressureregulated volume control mode of ventilation with a tidal volume v t of ml mlkg of ideal body weight respiratory rate rr of breaths per minute and positive endexpiratory pressure peep of cm h o. he was sedated with hydromorphone midazolam and propofol continuous intravenous infusions. his chest computed tomography scan postintubation revealed extensive multifocal groundglass opacities bilaterally pneumomediastinum with subcutaneous emphysema up to the base of the neck without any pulmonary embolism figure . the blood cultures on admission and respiratory pathogen panel were negative and the sputum culture grew few staphylococcus aureus.on day to of hospitalization the patient developed worsening oxygenation and hypercarbia despite an increasing fraction of inspired oxygen fio to peep to cm h o rr to breaths per minute and v t to ml mlkg of ideal body weight. his plateau pressures were around cm h o with inspiratory pressures around cm h o. cxr showed worsening diffuse bilateral pulmonary opacities figure . arterial blood gas revealed a ph of pco of mm hg pao of mm hg and hco of mmoll with pao fio pf ratio of . the ability to both oxygenate and ventilate him was further complicated by his known pneumomediastinum which we speculated he had developed with persistent coughing due to covid before admission. the pneumomediastinum was treated conservatively without chest tube placement but there were concerns regarding the safety of increasing his peep and tv.due to the refractory hypoxemia despite maximal conventional medical management for ards he was evaluated by a multidisciplinary team for vv ecmo selection. transthoracic echocardiogram revealed normal biventricular function with no valvular abnormalities. his respiratory ecmo survival prediction resp score was giving him an estimated inhospital survival of to . he received point for mechanical ventilation for days prior to initiation of ecmo he received points for viral pneumonia covid and he received point for neuromuscular blockade before ecmo table . he had a prediction of survival on ecmo therapy preset score of giving him estimated icu mortality of around . the patient received point for mean arterial pressure between and mm hg point for lactate between and mmoll and point for hospital days preecmo table . on day of hospitalization approximately day of the disease process he was initiated on vv ecmo. bifemoral cannulation was performed with ultrasound guidance at the bedside in the patients room. the ecmo configuration was as follows cardiohelp device quadroxid adult oxygenator fr singlestage right femoral venous outflowoxygenated cannula and fr multistage left femoral venous inflowdeoxygenated cannula. the initial ecmo settings were a blood flow at lmin sweep gas at lmin with a fio of . after the initiation of ecmo improvement in his oxygenation and hypercarbia was noticed with arterial blood gas showing a ph of pco of mm hg pao of mm hg and hco of mmoll thus his mechanical ventilator settings were decreased to a v t of ml rr of breaths per minute peep of cm h o and fio of to promote further lung protection. additionally on the day of admission up until day of hospitalization he was placed in an institutional review boardapproved multicenter randomized blinded controlled trial where he received either remdesivir or placebo.the patients ecmo course was complicated. he suffered from acute blood loss anemia from hematuria epistaxis and oropharyngeal bleeding requiring frequent blood transfusions while on a continuous heparin infusion as anticoagulation for the ecmo circuit. despite growing concerns regarding the possible development of a hypercoagulable state in patients with covid we elected to decrease the patients heparin infusion initially to a lower ptt goal of to seconds and then eventually discontinued all anticoagulation for days. a venous duplex was performed on hospital day as the patient was completely immobile while on bifemoral vv ecmo off all anticoagulation and at high risk for thrombus formation. the duplex was found to be negative for acute or chronic venous thrombus in all extremities. additionally we had difficulty maintaining full ecmo flows of to lpm while also trying to prevent volume overload in the setting of severe ards and ultimately decreased his ecmo flows to around to lpm with the sweep around to lpm for the majority of his ecmo course.on hospital day days of vv ecmo we began noticing an improvement in his lung function and lung compliance. we started daily challenges of weaning sweep and fio on ecmo while subsequently increasing his ventilator support. he underwent tracheostomy on day of hospitalization as we wanted to get the tracheostomy performed before ecmo decannulation. on day of hospitalization day on ecmo and approximately day of the disease process he was successfully decannulated at the bedside and vv ecmo was removed. the hospital course included a total of days of mechanical ventilation. our ability to wean him from mechanical ventilation was delayed due to ventilatorassociated pneumonia secondary to staphylococcus aureus and klebsiella pneumoniae. the patient required tracheostomy for days that included days on mechanical ventilation. on hospital day his tracheal aspirate was negative for covid by polymerase chain reaction. he underwent aggressive rehabilitation with physical therapy and occupational therapy while hospitalized. he was discharged home after days of hospitalization without the need for supplemental oxygen or support devices and was decannulated from his tracheostomy. his cxr before discharge revealed an interval improvement in multifocal pulmonary opacities figure . despite a complicated and prolonged hospitalization including days in the icu and the development of nosocomial infections he was able to avoid a multiorgan failure during his entire hospitalization.the majority of patients with covid have mild illness and can be cured with supportive management and oxygen supplementation. although rates vary among hospitalized covid patients up to make their way to the icu. among those who are critically ill acute hypoxemic respiratory failure from ards is the dominant finding which may require invasive mechanical ventilation. in up to of nonsurvivors from covid high mortality was associated with severe respiratory failure from viral pneumonia. the conventional management of patients with ards requiring invasive mechanical ventilation includes lungprotective ventilation with low tidal volume high peep deep sedation prone positioning neuromuscular blockade with the use of paralytics steroids and inhaled nitric oxide or epoprostenol. although robust evidence in support of benefit with the use of ecmo for ards is lacking it serves as a rescue therapy with a mortality benefit in patients with severe reversible acute respiratory failure when the conventional therapies have failed. ecmo is not a diseasemodifying therapy and does not cure lung disease rather it serves as a bridge to lung recovery by allowing lung rest to the damaged alveoli in ards. it allows the use of lungprotective ventilation strategies by reducing mechanical power and driving pressure. ecmo therapy has been used in patients with ards since however it has become more popular in the last decade due to remarkable progress in the ecmo circuit components increased safety and availability. improvement in mortality with ecmo was reported in the nonrandomized studies during the influenza a hn epidemic in and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus epidemic in supporting the use of ecmo for refractory hypoxemia. as the world is currently facing the covid pandemic the role of ecmo in ards secondary to covid is being explored. early reports from china on the use of ecmo for covid suggested a high mortality rate of around to in adult patients with ards. there is some encouraging evidence in the form of case reports and series suggesting clinical benefit with the use of ecmo in covid. in a recent case series of patients by osho and colleagues patients survived severe ards due to covid with vv ecmo. the median duration of vv ecmo in these patients was days days. jacobs and colleagues published an analysis of patients with covid supported with ecmo. they demonstrated that of patients were alive with of alive on ecmo at the time of publication. five out of who had been decannulated survived postecmo removal. with our case report we attempt to highlight a case of a young otherwise healthy male who developed severe ards and completely recovered with the use of ecmo therapy.there are main types of ecmo circuits venoarterial va and vv. vv ecmo provides respiratory support within an extracorporeal circuit and is meant to treat hypercarbia and hypoxemia. vv is by far the most common convention used in the management of refractory ards. vv ecmo could be performed either via a single duallumen catheter usually in the neck or via dualsite cannulation which draws blood from the femoral vein and reinfuses it in the internal jugular vein or the contralateral femoral vein. dualsite cannulation could be performed at the bedside without the requirement for transesophageal echocardiogram and fluoroscopy. therefore for patients with covid dualsite cannulation is preferable for respiratory support as it reduces the potential exposure of the health care workers and utilization of resources. most of the reported experience with ecmo for covid is with vv ecmo. va ecmo is used to provide both mechanical circulatory and respiratory support. covid is a multisystem disorder that is also associated with cardiovascular complications such as acute myocarditis cardiogenic shock and heart failure. however the experience with va ecmo in covid patients is extremely limited. to date only case of fulminant myocarditis in a patient with covid has been reported who was successfully rescued with va ecmo as a bridge to recovery. ecmo could act as potentially lifesaving therapy in covid patients with refractory hypoxemia and terminal respiratory failure. however ecmo therapy in covid patients poses a lot of additional challenges that could affect how ecmo is delivered for ards patients. ecmo facility is available in specialized centers. it requires a team of expert personnel experienced in initiating maintaining and discontinuing ecmo and managing its related complications. due to the worldwide pandemic there is a huge burden on the health care resources for the management of patients with covid. the use of ecmo for covid also involves ethical challenges. it diverts the already overwhelmed health care resources from the other critically ill patients. ecmo is a high resourceintensive and prolonged mode of treatment. additionally ecmo management enhances the potential exposure of health care workers to sars cov which is a highly transmissible disease especially with the limited personal protective equipment across many hospitals. ecmo therapy is also inherently associated with complications that increase morbidity and mortality such as the increased risk of hemorrhage due to the use of anticoagulant and systemic thrombosis among many others. at this time there are no defined guidelines for selecting patients with covid patients for ecmo therapy. based on the experience gained during the management of patients with sars cov hn influenza a and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus patients who are young and have fewer or no comorbidities are expected to have the highest probability of survival and should be given preference for consideration for ecmo in covid patients. patients with advanced age terminal diseases such as advanced malignancy severe multiorgan failure severe neurologic damage such as anoxic brain injury inability to receive blood transfusions or anticoagulation would be some of the absolute contraindications to ecmo therapy in covid patients. to ensure the ethical distribution of resources the relative and absolute contraindications may vary with time as the health care resources get overburdened due to the progressing covid pandemic. although not prospectively validated in covid patients the pulmonary and extrapulmonary predictive survival models such as resp and preset might serve as decision support in covid patients with ards to be placed on ecmo therapy. the resp score was developed in by schmidt and colleagues through a multicenter retrospective cohort study with patients from the extracorporeal life support organization elso registry. it was created as a predictor of survival to hospital discharge for adult patients receiving ecmo for acute respiratory failure. the tool includes different patient variables that add up to a final score between and with each score being associated with different risk classes of inhospital survival. the higher the score the lower the risk class for ecmo candidacy and subsequently the higher the predicted inhospital survival. the preset score was developed in through a derivation cohort study of ards patients receiving vv ecmo at a single center in germany. it was created as a predictor of icu survival for ards patients receiving ecmo. the tool includes different patient variables all of which are extrapulmonary. the total score ranges from to and each score places the patient in of the risk classes. the higher the score the higher the risk class and subsequently the higher the expected icu mortality.we suggest that early referral to specialized tertiary care centers equipped with resources expertise and standardized ecmo protocols should be considered for patients with severe respiratory failure from covid. the patient selection timing and management should be determined on a casebycase basis by a multidisciplinary team of intensivists cardiac surgeons critical care nurses respiratory therapists pharmacists and perfusionists. ecmo could improve patient outcomes in optimally selected patients with covid however as mentioned above its use is limited by its availability cost increased exposure to health care providers to infection and limited resources and staff during the global pandemic of covid.presently the utility of ecmo in covidrelated ards remains controversial. however the data reported so far suggest that ecmo could be associated with positive outcomes in severe respiratory failure due to covid in highly selected patients in specialized centers. therefore it is important to develop algorithms that would guide us in initiating ecmo on patients with covid who are expected to benefit the most from this rescue therapy. at the same time health care institutions should take appropriate measures to ensure the safety of the staff prevent the spread of infection and not divert critical care resources from the other covid patients who are not on ecmo. a lot still needs to be learned about the role of ecmo in patients suffering from refractory respiratory failure.the authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research authorship andor publication of this article.the authors received no financial support for the research authorship andor publication of this article.informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this manuscript..